# Running W3C Validator with HTML5 support on Heroku


### Prerequisites

This guide assumes that you have access to a Linux or OS X machine with the following:

* [Heroku toolbelt](https://toolbelt.heroku.com/) - installed and configured with your login information
* [GIT](http://git-scm.com/downloads) client - it can also be downloaded as part of the Heroku Toolbelt
* [Vulcan](https://github.com/heroku/vulcan) build system - used to build W3C validator dependencies that will work on Heroku's manifold
* [cURL](http://curl.haxx.se/) command line utilities - you might already have *wget* which is similar, but Heroku doesn't have it, so we'll use *curl* to be compatible through and through

This guide might also be useful for Windows users who are running Cygwin, but it hasn't been tested in this scenario.

If you choose to deploy the HTML5 validator alongside the basic W3C validator, you will also need:

* Java SDK version 1.6 or higher, and a properly set JAVA_HOME environment variable pointing to the SDK's installation directory
* [Mercurial](http://mercurial.selenic.com/) client
* [Subversion](http://subversion.apache.org/) client


### Overview of the installation process

The Heroku platform offers the ability to run only one application type in one *app* instance. This means that we will have to run up to two separate Heroku *app*s: an optional one for the [validator.nu](http://validator.nu/) HTML5 validator, and a mandatory one for the base W3C validator.

Since we need to have the validator.nu's HTML5 validator already configured when we set up and deploy the W3C validator, the instructions will first guide you through deployment in that order.

If you choose not to deploy HTML5 validation, skip the following section and continue with the section below titled "Setting up W3C validator."


### Preparation steps

All of the work we are going to do assumes that we have a directory called *validator* in our Linux home directory. While you are at it, we might as well change into that directory:

    mkdir ~/validator
    cd ~/validator
    
Now let's get started with the serious work...


## Setting up validator.nu

### Downloading and compiling the HTML5 validator

First, let's make a directory to house the validator.nu sources during the build phase, and enter it:

    mkdir validator-nu
    cd validator-nu

Now download the build system for the HTML5 validator, enter the build directory, and tell it to download all of the dependencies and components of the system and try to build and run the system:

    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/validator/build .
    ./build.py --local all
    
This step will most likely fail with a *ClassNotFoundException* Java exception. It's a side effect of validator.nu's partially broken build system. If the source is fixed by the time you are reading this tutorial, a correctly running HTML5 validator system will report readyness for use with the following lines (but different dates/times, of course):

    2012-09-06 22:46:12.141:INFO::jetty-6.1.26
    2012-09-06 22:46:12.202:INFO::Started SocketConnector@0.0.0.0:8888

If the system compiled and ran correctly, stop it by pressing Ctrl-C. If not, you should be back at your prompt anyway, but with lots of errors on your screen. These errors resolve when you run the build system a second time, but we won't do that yet.

In either case, we first need to apply a special patch to the source code to make it compatible with running on the Heroku manifold:

    curl -L https://raw.github.com/gist/3663668/cb2fdb506ec93373b59b34cbb60a7725abd6d5bc/heroku.patch | patch -p0
    
It should not respond with any errors, and result in this output:

    patching file validator/src/nu/validator/servlet/Main.java
    
Now, try building the system again:

    ./build.py --local all

This time, you should not get any errors and you should be greeted with the message that the validator started:

    2012-09-06 22:47:22.437:INFO::jetty-6.1.26
    2012-09-06 22:47:22.509:INFO::Started SocketConnector@0.0.0.0:8888

If you made it this far, we're almost there! Stop the running HTML5 validator instance and let's finish this by creating a startup script and packing everything for deployment to Heroku:

    ./build.py --local script
    ./build.py --local tar


### Deploying to Heroku

Now that we have the validator built, we need to prepare a directory which will serve as a staging point for Heroku deployments. As Heroku uses *git* to manage deployments, we will need to initialize that directory as a git repository. First off, let's create a directory one level above the validator.nu's source directory, get into it and initialize the git repository:

    mkdir ../heroku-html5
    cd ../heroku-html5
    git init
    
Now we need to copy the packed HTML5 validator binaries into our Heroku directory, and unpack them. Afer that, we are going to modify the startup script so it is compatible with the Heroku manifold.

    for i in `ls ../validator-nu/*.tar.gz`; do tar xf $i; done
    sed -e 's/8888/\$PORT/' < run-validator.sh > rv.tmp
    mv rv.tmp run-validator.sh
    chmod +x ./run-validator.sh

Almost ready for testing… we need to create a Heroku Procman [procfile](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/procfile) which will instruct Heroku how to run our program, commit all of our files to git, as well as actually create the Heroku application:

    echo "web: ./run-validator.sh" > Procfile
    git add -A
    git commit -am 'initial version'
    heroku apps:create --buildpack http://github.com/ryandotsmith/null-buildpack.git
    
Heroku should respond along the following lines:

    Creating whispering-coast-8382... done, stack is cedar
    
    BUILDPACK_URL=http://github.com/ryandotsmith/null-buildpack.git
    http://whispering-coast-8382.herokuapp.com/ | git@heroku.com:whispering-coast-8382.git
    Git remote heroku added    
    
**One important point here**: the name of the Heroku application (ie. *whispering-coast-8382* in our example) will be different for each user. Remember that name as you will need it later if you plan on deleting the application from the command line.

We are now ready to send our files to Heroku. This step will automatically start the application after it is uploaded, but it may take a minute or two to actually start. The first push will likely take some time, so after running this, you might as well go grab a quick cup of coffee:

    git push -u heroku master
    
If the process was successful, this command should result in significant output ending in something along these lines. Note that the actual slug size, git commit IDs and the URL will differ based on the name of the application created above:

    -----> Compiled slug size is 16.5MB
    -----> Launching... done, v1
           http://whispering-coast-8382.herokuapp.com deployed to Heroku
           
    To git@heroku.com:whispering-coast-8382.git
       ee8f46a..84ab89d  master -> master
       
Supposing you let that simmer for a few minutes, we are now ready to open up the application and test it out:

    heroku open
    
This should start your local web browser and open the Validator.nu's HTML5 validator interface. Half of the work is done. Let's get with the other half!

*P.S.* If you want to monitor, manage or modify the paralel execution of your Heroku application, you should take a look at Heroku's [command line client](https://devcenter.heroku.com/categories/command-line) documentation.


## Setting up W3C validator

The W3C validator requires a complex mixture of external binaries, a standalone Perl HTTP server and the W3C validator code itself. Let's address those one at a time:

### Setting up the Vulcan build system

Each Heroku instance is capable of running a wide variety of binaries that are included in the Heroku manifold image. However, some of the tools that are required by the W3C validator are not included by default. In order to prepare binaries for deployment on Heroku, we need to compile them using Heroku's build tool called Vulcan.

The first step to this process is to create a Vulcan build server

    vulcan create vulcan-somename
    
In the previous command, you'd replace *somename* with either your username, or some other identifying string. However, you will not need this name again unless you decide to delete the Vulcan Heroku app from your Heroku account. Future builds using Vulcan will use your own build app, without any special configuration.

The previous command should take a bit of time and result in a lot of output, ending in something along these lines:

    -----> Building runtime environment
    -----> Discovering process types
           Procfile declares types -> web
    -----> Compiled slug size is 4.1MB
    -----> Launching... done, v3
           http://vulcan-somename.herokuapp.com deployed to Heroku

    To git@heroku.com:vulcan-somename.git
     * [new branch]      master -> master


### Building W3C dependencies using Vulcan

#### Building *tidyp*

We need the binaries for the *tidyp* HTML cleaner and validator. We will be compiling it using Vulcan:

    cd ~/validator/
    curl -LO http://github.com/downloads/petdance/tidyp/tidyp-1.04.tar.gz
    tar xf tidyp-1.04.tar.gz
    cd tidyp-1.04
    vulcan build -o ../tidyp-bin.tgz
    
The last command will pack up the contents of the current directory and send it over to your previously created Vulcan build app on Heroku. It will compile the code, pack up the binaries and download them back to your computer in a file called *~/validator/tidyp-bin.tgz*.

##### Installing W3C Perl dependencies

It's now time to set up Perl by downloading the Bundle::W3C::Validator package from CPAN, a central Perl software repository.


---

Written by Ivan Stojic <ivans@ordecon.com>, licensed under [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)
